Blog post: Nature, Individuality, and Developer Empowerment (#318)
JoshuaKGoldberg/Goldblog: content/blog/nature-individuality-empowerment/index.md

---

![The Thinker in The Gates of Hell](./thinker-gates-of-hell.jpg)

<em style="display:block;margin-bottom:2rem;text-align:center;">
The Thinker in The Gates of Hell
<br />
<small>
File copied from Wikipedia under the Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic license. [<a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Le_penseur_de_la_Porte_de_lEnfer_(mus%C3%A9e_Rodin)_(4528252054).jpg"  rel="noopener noreferrer"target="_blank">source</a>]
</small>
</em>

Programs are written in code.
Code is described by programming languages.
If you understand a programming language, given enough time, you can read a program's code and understand how it works.
There is no magic in programming.

Yet, when you're new to programming, it _feels_ like there's magic everywhere.
Programs do weird things and it's hard to understand why.
Even after you've mastered one area of an application, the rest of it may still feel like a daunting shadow of uncertainty.

I'd like to use this blog post to make the following three points:

-   We shouldn't let fear of the unknown stop ourselves from digging into code
-   Organizations are understandable, learnable systems too

> -   Stifling fear and being inquisitive is an important part of gaining seniority

Reviewer: are these points or arguments, id argue they're arguments. 

on the 2nd one are you saying "learnable systems, like organizations, are understandable" i feel like learnable and understandable are almost synonyms, so the sentence feels awkward to me but maybe thats just me

on the 3rd one 
Stifling fear and being inquisitive *are* important parts of gaining seniority 
(you list 2 things)

To help provide context on those points, I'm going to bring in an example from an unusual source: a book on religious thought.

## A Letter in the Scroll

I'm midway through reading _A Letter in the Scroll_ by the late great Rabbi Lord Jonathan Sacks.
It's a magnificent read regardless of your personal spirituality -I'm an atheist myself, raised Jewish- and I'd highly recommend it in that context.

> Its _The Idea of Man_ chapter was particularly interesting to me as a developer in how it links ancient humans' lack of power over nature with how they developed worldviews:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The chapter titled "The Idea of Man" was particularly interesting to me as a developer in how it links ancient humans' lack of power over nature with how they developed worldviews:
```

> There have been cultures--ancient Greece is the supreme example--that saw the world in terms of vast impersonal forces...
> Seen in this perspective, the forces that govern the world are ... not addressed to us.

Contrast that with its description of Abrahamic religions:

> The Hebrew Bible represents a radical alternative...
> We can do more than react to stimuli; we can contemplate alternatives and choose between them.
>
> **We can imagine and act on the basis of our imagination.**

> In other words, ancient western religions saw us as pawns at the whim of gods, while Abrahamic religions see us as players at the table but still beholden to an influencing higher power.

Reviewer: id rephrase the last bit to
while Abrahamic religions see us as players at the table ~but~ though still beholden to an influencing higher power.

Reviewer 2: you may want to couch this in "some ancient civilizations" vs. "some abrahamic religions," there may be folks who find the current statement to be a generalization, i'm also not sure there's a clean separation btwn western and abrahamic...

_(I'm slightly manipulating the chapter's intent and ignoring many interpretations of the monotheistic God to make a more narrow point; for a real religious discussion, go read the book!)_

> ### Black Boxes

Reviewer 2: i think this section could use a bit of tweaking to more closely match the tone of https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/Goldblog/pull/318/files#diff-fe0ee082c0422f7c3c9bd9a089075d25b1f8f0a8fa6005cb16d3d79f1a4ef359R132

Reviewer 2: emphasizing that black boxes can be very helpful when you're starting out and trying to get the swing of things, and you should not try to "unblackbox" everything

Author: Sorry, I don't follow what you mean by the 'tone'?

I did add a sentence that I use them in my day-to-day, if that helps. +1 to not implying they're always bad.

> I see a parallel between those different worldviews and how professionals -software developers in particular- grow in their career.

Reviewer: in their careers*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I see a parallel between those different worldviews and how professionals -software developers in particular- grow in their careers.
```

> Early stage developers often don't fully understand the APIs, functions, and other system they interact with.

Reviewer: systems*

> Early stage developers often don't fully understand the APIs, functions, and other system they interact with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Early stage developers often don't fully understand the API's, functions, and other systems they interact with.
```

Author: Agreed on 'system' -> 'systems', but on API -> API's... do you have a source for that being the correct thing @saghdaey? I've been under the impression that you don't have to. My Googling is showing a lot of sketch websites agreeing with me but nobody I would actually trust.

Reviewer 2: i'll definitely back @saghdaey here haha

Author: Every fiber of my being is screaming in agony but as thanks for such a great set of reviews I will stifle that pain down and cease resisting.

They use the concept of [black boxes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_box) to skip understanding those systems deeply.
No shade against black boxes -- without them, the cognitive complexity of any task would be boundless.

One downside of thinking in terms of black boxes, though, is that it can get you in the _habit_ of avoiding understanding a new system.

> One of the most common mistake I see developers make is avoid trying to understand a new area of code adjacent to what they're working on.

Reviewer: most common mistakes*

Reviewer: One of the most common mistake I see developers make is avoid trying to understand a new area of code adjacent to what they're working on.
```suggestion
One of the most common mistakes I see developers make is to avoid trying to understand a new area of code adjacent to what they're working on.
```

Instead of understanding the system as a whole, they isolate their changes to just the areas they understand.
They then are at risk of missing crucial context contained in those surrounding areas.

As an extreme example, I once came across a section of a project where a moderately complex set of code logic had [convergently evolved](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convergent_evolution) in almost identical lines of code across several functions.

> That violation of [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) wouldn't be so bad on its own -- expect the functions were directly calling each other, making all but one of the sets redundant!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That violation of [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) wouldn't be so bad on its own -- except the functions were directly calling each other, making all but one of the sets redundant!
```

When asked why they hadn't moved or reused existing code, each developer who'd contributed to the duplication indicated they hadn't looked deeper into the call stack.
Each had treated other areas _within the same section of the codebase_ as a black box.

Black boxes are a useful technique for simplifying designs in thought, but make sure you don't use it to the point of not understanding the systems at play.
Remember you're a human and can do more than react to stimuli.
There are no natural forces or magical impossibilities in programming.

### Systems of People

> Organizations of people are systems too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Organizations of people are systems, too.
```

> Rules governing their behavior and processes exist that hopefully are generally followed.

Reviewer: i dont think you need that `hopefully`

When you first join an organization, though, it can be hard to feel that it's an understandable system.

> Assignments are given to you from the forces that be -a black box of decision-making- and expected to grow the project in a pre-ordained way.

Reviewer 2: i think you're missing a word or two here?
```suggestion
Assignments are given to you from the forces that be -a black box of decision-making- and you are expected to grow the project in a pre-ordained way.
```

Reviewer: i had to read this sentence a couple times too. in the end, i assumed he meant the assignments are expected to grow the project? maybe i misunderstood 😂

Who are you, a cog in the machine, to question the powers around you?

The ability for developers to be inquisitive on assignments and general organizational decision-making around themselves is crucial for at least two reasons:

> -   Without understanding goals, you're not likely to execute tasks correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Without understanding goals, you're unlikely to execute tasks correctly
```

> -   It's exceedingly difficult to positively influence the organization around you if you never question, let alone attempt to manipulate it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   It's exceedingly difficult to positively influence the organization around you if you never question, let alone attempt to manipulate, it
```

#### Understanding Goals

> Tasks are not given in isolation: there is always some underlying context.

Reviewer: id consider expanding on this, maybe?

_Tasks are not given in isolation: there is always underlying context and tasks should generally support a team or business goal._

Developers all too often aim to to satisfy the exact criteria given to them instead of thinking deeply on the best way to satisfy the backing context.

> If a ticket is written asking for a cache to improve performance calling a slow endpoint, it's tempting to dive into implementing a cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a ticket is written requesting a cache to improve performance calling a slow endpoint, it's tempting to take that request and dive in to implement a cache without further analysis.
```

> But maybe the endpoint's performance should be improved?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But maybe the endpoint's performance could be improved, eliminating the need for a cache?
```

> Maybe you should use an existing technique such as edge caching instead of re-implementing your own?

Reviewer: should it be "re-implementing" or "implementing" here

Author: Hmm, I guess it could be either? I was thinking of times when someone proposed doing something that was coincidentally the same as an existing system. To me that's more different from people implementing their own, not-the-same systems... which is also bad!

> Is that endpoint even called in a hot path, or if it is, can it be lazy-loaded to not be a blocker?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is that endpoint even called in a hot path, and if it is, can it be lazy-loaded to not be a blocker?
```

There is an old joke that developers would prefer hours of trial and error than a few minutes reading the docs.
The same holds true for understanding requirements.

> A few minutes thinking deeply about the right solution can save hours implementing the wrong one.

Reviewer: TRUE~~~~~~~!!!!!!!!! # wethinkdeeply

Author: I was so tempted to put more Codecademy values things in here but ended up refactoring them away for being a little _too_ on the nose haha...

#### Speaking Up

Systems of people are just that: _systems_ of _people_.
A system has well-defined inputs and outputs.

> A team makes decisions because it's been given a set of goals to hit and resources to work with.

Reviewer: nit: goals to reach (imo sounds a bit less casual than goals to hit)

Each person on that team is motivated by their own career incentives, personal goals, and past experiences.

When a team process gives a result you don't agree with -a feature backlogged; an investigation cut short; whatever- that doesn't have to be the end of the story.
Talk to the people involved in the process to learn why they came to that conclusion.
Do they have information you're missing, or vice versa?
Ask around.
Apply [Five Whys](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_whys).
If you think you have information that wasn't considered, counterpoint with it.
I've seen far too many silly decisions persist because a team member heard an incorrect decision and didn't question it.

> I would much rather work with a developer who's pretty good at coding and pretty good at providing feedback on my pull requests, RFCs, and team planning than a developer who is amazing at coding and quiet on the rest.

Reviewer: same <3

> I would much rather work with a developer who's pretty good at coding and pretty good at providing feedback on my pull requests, RFCs, and team planning than a developer who is amazing at coding and quiet on the rest.

Reviewer: same! <3

## Classifying Developer Levels

I'll finish with one last credit to _A Letter in the Scroll_.

> From reading _The Idea of Man_, I think I can finally articulate a succinct, easily explainable perspective on the differences between software developer job titles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From reading "The Idea of Man", I think I can finally articulate a succinct, easily explainable perspective on the differences between software developer job titles.
```

In order:

> 1. Junior developers: are getting their start understanding the forces of nature

Reviewer 2: i wonder if you might want to raise this point earlier on, i worry that some juniors may read this and be overwhelmed that they have to understand how *everything* works in order to be a "good" engineer

2. Mid-range developers: are competent, perhaps confident, in manipulating those forces of nature

> 3. Senior developers: have seen through the facade and can work with the scientific rules behind nature

Reviewer 2: im confused about the scientific rules part, where does that come from? i dont think you mentioned this earlier

Author: Yeah it's a Dwigt-style holdover from a find-and-replace. Refactored now!

4. Staff developers: are competent, perhaps confident, in manipulating those scientific rules

> "Forces of nature" means both the _programming_ forces -APIs, frameworks, IDEs, languages, etc.- and _organizational_ -data, OKRs people, teams, etc.-.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Forces of nature" are the _programming_ forces -APIs, frameworks, IDEs, languages, etc.- and _organizational_ -data, OKRs people, teams, etc.-.
```

To truly master your domain, you need to be comfortable treating areas as a black box or diving in questioningly as needed.

> I became a staff developer not when I first demonstrated high competence at building projects in TypeScript but when I later demonstrated high competence at working with and creating systems of people to empower others to do the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I became a staff developer not when I first demonstrated high competence at building projects in TypeScript, but when I later demonstrated high competence at working with and creating systems of people, empower others to demonstrate competence at building projects in TypeScript.
```

(i find it a bit clearer/easier to read this way)

Author: Yeah I've been on the fence for this sentence. I hate saying anything that could be taken as bragging ("look at me I got promo"), and this is raising alarm bells...

> I became a staff developer not when I first demonstrated high competence at building projects in TypeScript but when I later demonstrated high competence at working with and creating systems of people to empower others to do the same.

Reviewer: i dont totally understand the link between the first and second sentences here though
i understand that youre trying to say "this what you need to be comfortable doing" and then following with a personal example from your career journey, but they dont feel that closely linked

Reviewer: like your example doesnt clear show you making decisions btwn treating something as a black box or asking questions/raising concerns

Author: Yeahhhhh, removed this heh

Assignments are given to you from the forces that be -a black box of decision-making- and are expected to improve the product in a pre-ordained way.
Who are you, a cog in the machine, to question the powers around you?

The ability for developers to be inquisitive on assignments and general organizational decision-making around themselves is crucial for at least two reasons:

-   Without understanding goals, you're unlikely to execute tasks correctly
-   It's exceedingly difficult to positively influence the organization around you if you never question, let alone attempt to manipulate, it

### Understanding Goals

Tasks are not given in isolation: there is always underlying context and tasks generally support a larger team or business goal.
Developers all too often aim to to satisfy the exact criteria given to them instead of thinking deeply on the best way to satisfy the backing context.

If a ticket is written requesting a cache to improve performance calling a slow endpoint, it's tempting to take that request and dive in to implement a cache without further analysis.
But maybe the endpoint's performance could be improved, eliminating the need for a cache?

> Maybe you should use an existing technique such as edge caching instead of (re-)implementing your own?

Author: @saghdaey continuing https://github.com/JoshuaKGoldberg/Goldblog/pull/318/files#r779970514: thoughts?

Reviewer: i dont know that the (re-) parentheses gets across the thought you outlined above!

Author: Haha me neither...
